hi there now watch this dude he's
standing in his backyard marveling at
the sky the clouds are dark and ominous
unmoving they're hanging over his head
the air is thick and humid and it's hard
to breathe he has an unsettling feeling
something bad is going to happen soon
suddenly he notices that his hair starts
to stand on end
he hurriedly turns and all but runs
inside he hardly has enough time to
close the door when a lightning bolt
hits the very spot where he was standing
just seconds ago
woohoo he recognized the signs of danger
in time and it saved his life a bolt of
lightning can heat up to 53,000 degrees
Fahrenheit that's five times hotter than
the surface of the Sun almost 100
lightning bolts strike earth every
second it adds up to more than eight
million per day and three billion every
year but enough of that I want to take
you on a journey to one of the most
mysterious places on our planet the area
with never-ending lightning storms the
most electric spot on earth it's where
the saying lightning doesn't strike the
same place twice loses any sense Lake
Maracaibo in Venezuela is known for one
eerie phenomena it's called the beacon
of Maracaibo or Catatumbo lightning
after the river that empties its water
into the lake there hundreds of
lightning bolts cut the sky every hour
and it occurs on more than 260 days per
year the place even got to the Guinness
Book of World Records for having the
highest concentration of lightning on
the planet it's rarely dark here at
night flashes of electricity illuminate
the sky without stopping a lightning
storm can rage for up to 10
hours a night but the most bizarre thing
about the lake no one has managed to
figure out the reasons for this natural
light show yet of course there are
several intriguing theories but is any
of them true right now you're standing
on the shore of a large lake which is
actually a part of the Caribbean Sea on
its three sides the lake is surrounded
by high mountain ridges those are the
Andes over the water
you see towering storm clouds these
dense clouds are called cumulonimbus
they're responsible for all kinds of
extreme weather from lightning storms to
tornados cumulonimbus clouds look fluffy
on the outside but don't let this
illusion fool you inside a great battle
is unfolding Wow it sounds like my life
these clouds usually form at the height
of 700 to 10,000 feet but their Peaks
can reach 39,000 feet and that's higher
than an airplane cruising altitude
suddenly you notice a cloud that looks
particularly ginormous much bigger than
its mates it might be that rare one with
its top at 69 thousand feet a fork
zigzag of lightning crosses the sky and
illuminates the surroundings a few
seconds later you feel the ground under
your feet shaking so powerful is the
sound wave created by the lightning the
rumbling of the Thunder doesn't fade
away for a while a veil of heavy rain
hides the horizon the storm is gaining
more power lightning bolts cut the sky
without stopping soon the cloud turns
into a massive bulb that lights up
everything around you realize you
probably could read a book during the
darkest hours of the night and you
wouldn't have to strain your eyes
another Catatumbo lightning mystery you
notice is it's uncanny color but the
precise hue varies from one person who
describes it to another some people
claimed lightning bolts are bright
yellow
orange others are sure they saw purplish
or even brown zigzags a widely spread
belief explaining this color phenomenon
is linked with the methane gas produced
by the swamps in the area but it's
nothing but a myth lightning bolts only
seem colored in reality they're no
different from any other Lightning in
any other location the unusual hues are
just a trick of the light the storms in
the area have been lasting for centuries
the lightning they produce is so bright
it can be seen from 250 miles away in
the past
sailors even use this phenomenon for
navigation the intensity and brightness
of the lightning storms could be the
reason for a belief that they don't
produce thunder it's not true though
there might be no sound effects because
the storm is happening too far away you
can still see it clearly even from a
distance of 30 to 60 miles but the sound
of thunder can only travel 10 to 15
miles away from the lightning bolt that
created it myth busted if you want to
see the most spectacular performances
you should come to the area during the
wet season with its peak in October
that's when you'll be able to admire up
to 30 lightning flashes every minute
during the driest months January and
February the storms aren't so intense
once in 2010 during severe droughts
famous lightning storms stopped what so
ever
no one spotted them for three long
months people even feared the Marvel
wouldn't be seen ever again luckily
these fears were unjustified the beacon
of Maracaibo is such a unique phenomenon
that the Venezuelan authorities are
trying to catalog it as a UNESCO World
Heritage Site
if they succeed Catatumbo lightning will
become the first natural phenomenon to
make it to the list
no wonder scientists have been searching
for the reasons for such intense
lightning storms for years in the middle
of the 20th century people thought it
could be because of the uranium deposits
in the bedrock it probably attracted
more lightning strikes
decades later this theory was abandoned
another study claimed that the beacon of
Maracaibo was caused by large oil
deposits and swamps in that region they
produced a lot of methane gas that made
the air over the lake more conductive it
allowed lightning to travel more freely
but let's assume this idea is correct
then due to methane properties there
would be more lightning storms during
the dry season from January to February
but in reality the most intense storms
happen during the wet season from April
to May and from September to October the
most likely theory is based on wind
patterns and landscape features the
whole region with its rivers lakes and
swamps is rather wet the hot tropical
Sun evaporates the water from the
wetland during the day but then in the
evening humid winds from the sea mixed
the warm air rising from the water with
the cold air rushing down from the
mountains the hot air goes up and forms
massive intimidating clouds
that's where unique lightning storms get
born researchers have their own ways to
record lightning data modern equipment
allows observers to stay as far as 250
miles away from the electric anomaly and
still get all the necessary information
scientists have even created a map of
the Earth's lightning hotspots
it proves lightning flashes are more
frequent over land than over oceans you
can also see much more impressive
lightning storms closer to the equator
this map appeared thanks to the tropical
rainfall measuring mission satellite
which was a joint project by NASA and
the Japanese aerospace exploration
agency one day scientists might figure
out the true reason behind Catatumbo
lightning right now though you don't
care mesmerized by dozens of colorful
flashes you're watching the greatest
light show ever
[Music]